I am vanessa daughter of annette
daughter of olympia daughter of Melvina
daughter of katie born 1878 parrish
county louisiana and my name is morgan
daughter Carol daughter of Lisa daughter
Willie daughter Sara born 18-49 in
Bardstown Kentucky and in the tradition
of our families the great oral tradition
of almost every black church we know
honoring the culture from which we draw
so much power we're going to start the
way our momma's and grandmas would want
us to start in prayer let the words of
my mouth the meditation of our hearts be
acceptable in thy sight O Lord my
strength and my Redeemer we call the
names and rituals of our ancestors into
this room today because from them we
received a powerful blueprint for
survival strategies and tactics for
killing carried across oceans by African
women passed down to generations of
black women in America who use those
skills to navigate institutions of
slavery and state-sponsored
discrimination in order that we might
stand on this stage we walk in the
footsteps of those women our foremothers
legends like Ella Baker septima Clark
Fannie Lou Hamer from whom we learned
the power of organizing after she what
almost single-handedly registers 60,000
voters in Jim Crow Mississippi 60,000 is
a lot of people so if you can imagine me
and Vanessa inspiring 60,000 women to
log of us last year we were fired up but
today 100,000 black women and girls
stand on this stage with us we are
committed to healing ourselves to lacing
up our sneakers to walking out of our
front door every single day for total
healing and transformation in our
communities because we understand that
we are in the footsteps of the civil
rights legacy like no
so other time before and that we are
facing a health crisis like never ever
before and so we've had a lot of moments
we've had a lot of great moments
including the time we've had on our
pajamas we were working on our computer
Michelle Obama emailed us and invited us
to the White House and we thought it was
spam we've had a lot of moments but this
moment here is an opportunity it is an
opportunity that we don't take for
granted and so we thought long and hard
about how we would use it would we talk
to the women we hope to inspire a
million in the next year or would we
talk to you we decided to talk to you
and to talk to you about a question that
we get all the time so that the millions
of women who hopefully will watch this
will never have to answer it again it is
why are black women dying faster and at
higher rates than any other group of
people in America from preventable
obesity-related diseases the question
hurts me I'm shaking a little bit
feels like a value Laden it hurts my
body because the weight represents so
much but we're going to talk about it
and invite you into an inside
conversation today because it is
necessary and because we need you each
night before the first day of school my
grandmother would sit me next to the
stove and with expert precision use a
hot comb to press my hair my grandmother
was legendary big loud she filled up a
room with laughter and often time curse
words she cooked a mean peach cobbler
had eleven children a house full of
grandchildren and like every black woman
I know like most all women I know she
had prioritized the care of others over
caring for herself
we measured her strength by her capacity
to endure pain and suffering we
celebrated her for it and our choice
would prove to be deadly one night after
pressing my hair before the first day of
eighth grade my grandmother went to bed
and never woke up dead at 66 years old
from a heart attack by the time I would
graduate college I would lose two more
beloved family members to chronic
disease my aunt Diane did at 55 my aunt
Tricia did at 63 after living with these
losses the hole that they left I decided
to calculate the life expected
of the women in my family staring back
at me the number 65 I knew I could not
sit by and watch another woman I loved
died and early death so we don't usually
put our business in the streets which is
here but I have to tell you the
statistics black women are dying at
alarming rates and I used to be a
classroom teacher and I was in South
Atlanta High School and I remember
standing in front of my classroom and I
remember a statistic that half of black
girls will get diabetes
unless diet and levels of activity
change half of the girls in my
classrooms I couldn't teach anymore and
so I started taking girls hiking which
is why were called girl trek but Vanessa
was like that is not gonna move the dial
on the health crisis is cute since it is
a cute hiking club so what we thought is
if we could rally a million of their
mothers 82 percent of black women over a
healthy weight right now 53 percent of
us are obese but the number that I
cannot that I cannot get out of my head
is that every single day in America
137 black women die from a preventable
disease heart disease that's every 11
minutes 137 is more than gun violence
cigarette smoking and HIV combined every
day it is roughly the amount of people
that were on my plane from New Jersey to
Vancouver can you imagine that a plane
filled with black women crashing to the
ground every day and no one is talking
about it so the question that you're all
asking yourselves right now is why why
are black women dying we asked ourselves
that same question why is what's out
there not working for them
private weight loss companies government
interventions public health campaigns
I'm going to tell you why because they
focus on weight loss they're looking
good in skinny jeans without
acknowledging the trauma that black
women hold in our bellies and bones that
has been embedded in our very DNA the
best advice from hospitals and doctors
the best medication from pharmaceutical
companies to treat the congestive heart
failure of my grand
there didn't work because they didn't
acknowledge the systemic racism that she
had dealt with since birth a divestment
in school discriminatory housing
practices predatory lending a crack
cocaine epidemic mass incarceration
putting more black bodies behind bars
than were owned at the height of slavery
but girltrek
does for black women whose bodies are
buckling under the weight of systems
never designed to support them girltrek
is a lifeline August 16 2015 Danita
Kendall a member of girltrek in Detroit
received the news that too many black
mothers have received her son Norman 23
years old a father of two was gunned
down while on an afternoon drive imagine
the grief that overcomes your body in
that moment the immobilizing fear now no
this that just days after laying her son
to rest
Anita Kendall posted online I don't know
what to do or how to move forward but my
sister's keep telling me I need to walk
so I will and then just days after that
I got my steps in today from my baby
norm it felt good to be out there to
walk walking through pain is what we
have always done my mom she's in the
middle right there
my mom desegregated her high school in
1955 her mom walked down the steps of an
abandoned school bus where she raised 11
kids as a sharecropper and her mom
stepped onto Indian territory fleeing
the tears of the Jim Crow South and her
mom walked her man to the door as he
went off to fight in the Kentucky color
regimen the Civil War they were born
slaves but they wouldn't die slaves
change-making
it's in my blood it's what I do and this
health crisis ain't nothing compared to
the road we have traveled
so it's like James Cleveland I don't
feel no ways tired so we got to work we
started looking at models of change we
looked all over the world we needed
something not only that was a part of
our cultural inheritance like walking
but something that was scalable
something that was high-impact something
that we could replicate across this
country so we studied models like when
Gauri Matai who won the Nobel Peace
Prize for inspiring women to plant 50
million trees in Kenya she brought Kenya
back from the brink of environmental
devastation we studied these systems of
change and we looked at walking
scientifically and what we learned is
that walking just 30 minutes a day can
single-handedly decrease all of your 50%
of your risk of diabetes heart disease
stroke even Alzheimer and dementia we
know that walking is the single most
powerful thing that a woman can do for
her health so we knew we were on to
something because from Harriet coming to
the women in Montgomery when black women
walk things change so how did we take
this simple idea of walking and start a
revolution that would catch a fire in
neighborhoods across America we use the
best practices of the civil rights
movement we huddled up in church
basements we did grapevine information
sharing through beauty salons we
empowered and trained mothers to stand
on the frontlines we took our message
directly to the streets and women
responded women like Leticia in
Chattanooga Kris Anthea in News Detroit
onika in New Orleans women with
difficult names and difficult stories
join girltrek
every day and commit to walking as a
practice of self-care once walking those
women get to organizing first their
families in their communities to walk
and talk and solve problems together
they walk and notice the abandoned
building they walked and notice the lack
of sidewalks the lack of green space and
they say no more women like Suzie page
in Philadelphia who after walking daily
past an abandoned building in her
neighborhood decided I'm not waiting
let me rally my team let me grab some
supplies let me do no one else has done
for me in my community we know one woman
can make a difference because one woman
has already changed the world and her
name is Harriet Tubman and trust me
period some and I'm obsessed with her
and I used to be a history teacher I
will not tell you the whole history I
will tell you four things so I got them
I used to have an old Saab the kind of
canvas top that drips on your head when
it rains and I drove all the way down to
the Eastern Shore of Maryland and when I
stepped on the dirt that Harriet Tubman
made her first escape I knew she was a
woman just like we are and that we could
do what she had done and we learned four
things from Harriet Tubman the first one
do not wait walk right now in the
direction of your healthiest most
fulfilled life because self-care is a
revolutionary act number two when you
learn the way forward come back and get
a sister so in our case start a team
with your friends your friends your
family your church number three
rally your allies every single person in
this room is complicit in a Tubman
inspire takeover and number four find
joy the most underreported fact of
Harriet Tubman is that she lived to be
93 years old
and she didn't live a just an ordinary
life she was standing up with a good guy
she married a younger man she adopted a
child she was okay she left and I drove
up to a house of freedom in upstate New
York and she had planted apple trees and
when I was there on the Sunday they were
they were blooming because do they blue
they were Apple for in season and I was
thinking she left fruit for us the
legacy of Harriet Tubman every single
year and we know that we are Harriet and
we know that there is a Harriet in every
community in America we also know that
there's a Harriet in every community
across the globe and that they could
learn from our Tubman doctrine as we
call it the four steps imagine the
possibilities beyond the neighborhoods
of Oakland in Newark to the women
working rice fields in Vietnam tea
fields in sri lanka the women on the
mountainsides of law Tamala the
indigenous reservations throughout the
vast plains of the Dakotas we believe
that women walking and talking together
to solve their problems is a global
solution and I'll leave you with this
because we also believe that can become
the center of social justice again
Vanessa and I were in Fort Lauderdale we
had a organizer training and I was
leaving and I got on the airplane and I
saw someone I knew so I waved and as I'm
waiting in that long line that you guys
know wait over people to put their stuff
away I looked back and I realized I
didn't know the woman but I recognized
her and so I blew her a kiss because it
was Sybrina Fulton Trayvon Martin's mom
and she whispered thank you back to me
and I can't help but wonder what would
happen if there were groups of women
walking on Trayvon's block that day or
what would happen in the southside of
Chicago every day if there were groups
of women and mothers and aunts and
cousins walking or along the polluted
rivers of Flint Michigan I believe that
walking can transform our communities
because it's already starting to we
believe that the personal is political
our walking is for healing for joy for
fresh air quiet time to connect and
disconnect to worship but it's also
walking so that we can be healthy enough
to stand on the front lines for change
in our communities and it is our call to
action to every black woman listening
every black woman and earshot of our
voice every black woman who you know
think about it the woman working front
guest reception at your job the woman
who delivers your mail your neighbor our
call to action to them to join us on the
front lines for change in your community
and I'll bring us back to this moment
and why it's so important from my dear
dear friend Vanessa and I it's because
it's not always easy for us and in fact
we have both seen really really dark
days from the hate speech to the summer
of police brutality and violence that we
saw last year to even losing one of our
walkers on a sandy bland who died in
police custody but the most courageous
thing we do every day is we practice
faith that goes beyond the facts and we
put feet to our prayers every single day
and when we get overwhelmed we think of
the words of people like Sonia Sanchez
the poet laureate who says Morgan where
is your fire where is a fire that burned
holes through slave ships to make us
breathe where is a fire that turned guts
into chitlins that took rhythms and they
jazz that
took sit-ins and marches and made us
jump boundaries and barriers you got to
find it and pass it on so this is us
finding our fire and passing it on to
you so please stand with us walk with us
as we rally a million women to reclaim
the streets of the 50 highest need
communities in this country we thank you
so much for this opportunity
[Applause]